A well-known sports figure is credited with the trenchant phrase: "If I suddenly want to listen to the thoughts of an intelligent person, I'll start talking." Of course, this outstanding mind was likely being ironic, but as we know, there's a grain of truth in every joke. All smart people are intelligent in different ways, but they still share something in common.

Psychologists have spent years trying to explain how people think and, most importantly, how intelligent people think. Of course, you shouldn't wave a placard with your IQ on it, but there are still some common threads in the way truly intelligent people think.

Let's be clear that a smart person isn't just one particular mindset – it's more like various cognitive profiles. Thus, the authors of a study in Scientific American explain that even people with the same IQ can perform differently on similar tasks. It's simply that their brains process information differently.

By the way, one shouldn't pay too much attention to IQ. While it's a fairly effective way to determine one's abilities, IQ is more of a person's mental foundation, while everything else depends on external and internal factors. It depends on a person's ability to "improve" themselves from that foundation.

Furthermore, high intelligence per se is not a measure of success – it can be associated with a number of risks, including a higher vulnerability to certain disorders. High intelligence doesn't necessarily mean infallibility, social resilience, or behavioral stability.

Nevertheless, psychologists have identified several general patterns by which one can recognize an intelligent person. So…

They can say "I don't know," both to themselves and to others

High intelligence doesn't mean a person is never wrong. The ability to say "I don't know" is a clear sign of a flexible and open mind. Just remember that the phrase "I know that I know nothing" is attributed to one of the greatest sages of antiquity, Socrates.

They can change their minds under the impact of changing reality

Our world is changing, and so is knowledge. Something that was considered an absolute axiom a couple of decades ago can now be disproved. So, a truly intelligent person isn't afraid to change and adapt. Not citing outdated authorities, but always being on trend – this is the way.

They can analyze and criticize themselves

Many centuries ago, a great writer observed, "The fool does think he is wise, but the wise man knows himself to be a fool." Centuries later, scientists gave this property a name: the Dunning-Kruger effect. Intelligent people tend to criticize themselves and recognize their "weaknesses." At the same time, a less competent person will typically overestimate their mental abilities.

They often talk to themselves

Research has shown that talking out loud increases our self-control, which is another sign of intelligence.

They can see patterns and structures in life and between facts

We're talking about the ability to compare facts, to build a structure and interconnections between things. Incidentally, knowledge is essential here; otherwise, we'll build a structure on a false premise. The ability to structure and draw unconventional conclusions can sometimes work wonders.

They can be compassionate

High emotional intelligence is often the companion of a great mind. Truly intelligent people can understand others' feelings, show empathy, and find common ground. This allows them to avoid unnecessary conflicts.

They can control themselves and switch from concentration to relaxation

It has been said that "a professional writer is someone who is capable of producing no less than a certain volume of text in any situation." This is a direct definition of self-control. If you can concentrate on what's truly important now, and then relax, this often indicates a high level of intelligence.

They can listen

Smart people can listen without interrupting, analyze what they've heard, and ask relevant questions. On the one hand, this refers to emotional intelligence, and on the other, to the ability to structure information. Unfortunately, in recent years, we've forgotten how to listen.

They aren't afraid of being lonely

In this crazy world, it's sometimes crucial to stop, think, prioritize, and make plans. And what better way to do this than time spent alone? So, the authors of a study conclude that enjoying being alone can be a sign of high intelligence. No, this doesn't mean introverts are smarter; it just means we're sometimes more mentally productive when alone.

They have a perfect sense of humor

And here we return to the sports figure once more. This individual is known for an excellent sense of humor. Essentially, humor encompasses all nine factors listed above. And, most importantly, being compassionate to avoid making inappropriate jokes about others. By the way, self-irony is precisely the ability to be self-critical.

Of course, there are always some exceptions, but most of these traits could actually be found in smart folks around us

Yes, human history knows absolute geniuses who were completely incapable of humor. There are those who were unwilling to listen to others. Exceptions always exist; that's true. But when it comes to random people, these traits will help identify someone truly smart. Especially if the person exhibits several of these factors at once.