If you're anything like me, you can't stand the heat. I totally get it, hot weather is probably my worst enemy. But with summer coming up, meaning outdoor activities, you don't want to be missing out! As someone who struggles with heat sensitivity, I've put together a list of the things I do to keep my body healthy and going, whether I'm just lounging on the beach or walking all over a vacation destination.

1. Hydrate, hydrate, hydrate

This is probably the simplest one and the thing we hear the most, so I'm putting it up first to reinforce its importance. But truly, if there's ever a time to be drinking more water than you ever have, it's in the summer. Not only when you're exercising but even doing more sedentary activities as well. Heat makes us sweat, and that is one of the fastest ways to lose hydration in our body. The best way is ice-cold in your favorite water bottle to help keep your body temperature lower, and to drink it like there's no tomorrow.

2. electrolyte it up!

While this one ties in with the previous tip about hydrating, I felt like it was important for it to have its own paragraph. Electrolytes are incredibly important when it comes to sustaining your hydration. Electrolytes often contain sodium, a mineral which helps your body retain water. This is why it's especially important to consider the intensity of your activity and how much your body sweats, because electrolytes will help you stay better hydrated. You can go for my favorite which is LiquidIV, or find natural substitutes like coconut water which is filled with electrolytes or create your own water mocktails that include a pinch of salt.

3. we all scream for sunscreen

I don't want to hear a single argument for this one. Sunburns can not only negatively impact skin health and lead to irreversible damage and risks, but they can also contribute to dehydration. Yes, you heard that right! So do yourself a favor and lather up in some SPF, the number range depending on your skin sensitivity and how well you want to be protected. And DON'T forget to reapply!!

4. frogg toggs and bucket hats and fans, oh my!

These are my top go-to always carrying accessories for when it comes to the heat. If you don't know what a Frogg Togg is, it's basically a little towel that comes in a portable container that you get wet and then it helps you keep cool by absorbing moisture. They are reusable and easily transportable. When it comes to hats, it doesn't have to be a bucket hat but they sure are my favorite. They protect the top of your head from being burnt and also from direct heat from the Sun, which helps keep your whole body cooler. And, call me crazy if you want, but a traditional hand fan is one of the best things I have ever purchased to help keep me cool. You don't have to worry about charging it, and you can just fold it up any time. They truly work wonders and are way more effective than you might think.

Please remember to take care of yourself and stay safe in the summer heat!