When a 13-year-old schoolboy discovered a small coin in a field on the outskirts of Berlin, he knew that he'd stumbled onto something special. But it wasn't until scholars analyzed the object that they realized its true significance. Minted in the third century B.C.E., the bronze coin is the first ancient Greek artifact ever unearthed in the German capital.

The teenager showed his find to researchers during a November 2025 visit to Petri Berlin, an interactive archaeology lab built atop the foundations of a medieval-era Latin school.

"Nobody knew exactly what it was because it was so small," Jens Henker, an archaeologist with the Berlin Heritage Authority, tells Smithsonian magazine. "That it was something old was clear."

A numismatist identified the find as a coin dated to between roughly 281 and 261 B.C.E. Per a statement, its obverse depicts a figure in a Corinthian helmet, while its reverse features an image of a deity in a kalathos headdress, with a spindle in one hand.

Initially, the experts were unsure whether the coin had been lost by a modern-day collector in Spandau, a neighborhood in western Berlin, or deposited in the ground closer to the time of its creation. But Henker soon realized that the field where the boy had found the coin was a well-known archaeological site.

Excavations in the past suggested that the area was used as a burial ground, perhaps beginning in the early Iron Age and continuing for centuries. Artifacts uncovered at the site include ceramic fragments and a bronze button.

At 12 millimeters in diameter, the newly discovered coin is significantly smaller than an American dime. Henker suggests that given its size, the coin held little value for the Germanic-speaking peoples who lived in the region at the time. With no system of currency, these tribes viewed coins from outside groups mainly as a source of silver, gold and other precious metals.

Ancient coins that weren't melted down for reuse have typically been found in burial grounds, suggesting they were "put in graves as a kind of grave gift," Henker tells Deutsche Welle's Sarah Hucal. "This appears to be like a souvenir used to remember something — perhaps even an experience in one's life."

Exactly how the coin traveled to Berlin remains unclear. While the bronze token is the first of its kind unearthed in the city, Henker says that ancient Greek coins have previously been found elsewhere in Germany. Archaeologists have also discovered objects imported from this part of Europe — including amber used to craft jewelry and other goods — in millennia-old graves.

Germanic tribes left behind no written records. But a book published in antiquity offers additional evidence of interactions between these groups and the ancient world. Although the original text is lost, reconstructions based on later histories indicate that the navigator documented his travels to distant lands. The Greeks "were aware, of course, that Europeans faced the ocean, an embracing ocean that many believed encircled the known world," an archaeologist wrote in a related work. "They also knew that from somewhere along this mysterious interface came tin, amber and gold."

The navigator, however, was the first person to travel beyond the "known world" and record what he saw. His findings challenged the image of these regions' inhabitants, so the Greeks "dismissed him a little bit at this time," Henker tells Smithsonian. "They said, 'He's spinning this. There's no way that it exists.'"

For now, Henker and his colleagues can only speculate on how the coin's journey unfolded. Trade is one possible explanation, but Henker also suggests that the ancient Greeks could have interacted with other peoples.