TikTok recommends sending a whole new type of message. On the app, @simply_nikkib_ has been sending "just because" texts to her friends, and she even counts it as part of a chill approach to wellness. This creator has been on a mission to find things that make her feel good, take less than 10 minutes, and cost less than 10 dollars a pop. These texts, she's found, check all three boxes.

Nikki will send weekly "just because" messages to friends and family. In the text, she shares something she appreciates about the person. If you do so on a regular basis, she says it can help you feel better and more connected. Nikki noted every time she sent a "just because" text, it put her in a better mood for the rest of the day, similar to writing in a gratitude journal.

According to Dr. Melissa Gluck, a licensed psychologist, this wellness hack is about strengthening your connections in a simple, low-effort way — and that can do wonders for your mood. Instead of waiting for Mother's Day or sending paragraphs on your friend's birthday, the "just because" text is about practicing gratitude for your relationships right here, right now. "You're reminding someone, 'Hey, you matter to me,' without needing a big reason or occasion," she tells Bustle.

Not only are these messages nice for your loved ones to read, but they actually shift how you feel, too. "A quick text can turn into a little back-and-forth that makes you feel more connected and less in your own head," Gluck tells Bustle. Even if they don't reply right away, it still feels good to know you said something sweet.

It's the perfect habit to adopt if you're typically too busy to chat, often forget to check your phone, or simply want to boost your connections. "There's something about putting out warmth that tends to come back to you," Gluck says. "It pulls you out of your own spiral for a second and puts you into connection mode. You're expressing something positive that's already there — appreciation, care, love, whatever it is — instead of just thinking it and moving on."

If you've been craving a gratitude practice, but are overwhelmed by the idea of journals and lists, this could be right for you. "You're noticing someone you care about and acting on it in real time," Gluck says. "That tends to feel good, both emotionally and physiologically."

Nikki recommends setting a weekly alarm and sending your gratitude text when it goes off. To ease in without feeling awkward, start by saying something vague like, "Hi! Thinking of you! What have you been up to lately?" If you're feeling bolder, you could say, "Just sending a message to say hi and I love you!"

Nikki recommends getting even more specific. When a commenter asked what she likes to send, she noted that she'll say something like, "Just wanted to say I appreciate you always making sure we have plans to see each other." By getting personal, it makes your message even more special.

You can also wait for inspiration to strike. "If you notice yourself thinking, 'Oh, this reminded me of them' or 'I should text them,' that's your cue to hit send," Gluck says. "Act on it instead of overthinking it. It doesn't need to be daily or structured to be impactful."

Once you hit send, focus on how you feel. You'll likely notice that positive emotions start to bubble up or that you feel more aware of the good things in your life. Revel in that feeling.