1. Use accurate information to formulate a weight management plan

All pets should be regularly weighed and scored on their body condition. Pet owners can use body condition scoring sheets for dogs and cats to do this at home.

Fearful pets who don't like being weighed at the vet can be weighed on home scales. Importantly, take note of what your pet eats (including treats and scavenged foods) and share this information with your vet.

A complete dietary history helps in planning a diet compatible with your pet's preferences. High-calorie foods could be substituted for ones with fewer calories, for example.

2. Diets should be low calorie, high satisfaction

Weight-loss diets should be nutritionally complete. The best diets are those that are reduced in calories, but still leave animals feeling satisfied after a meal.

Low-calorie treats can be factored into the daily ration so that animals don't miss out.

3. Provide opportunities to hunt, find and forage food

Feeding the daily ration in multiple smaller meals can burn additional calories and increase time spent eating.

Allowing animals to "hunt" for food by providing food in puzzle feeders, scatter feeding or setting up "treasure hunts" allows them to express natural behaviours.

Animals may use up more calories and experience more pleasure from foods they can chew. They may also spend less time "asking" owners for food.

4. Be prepared for begging

Animals used to receiving table scraps will dial up their attention-seeking behaviour in an increased effort to be rewarded. It can be hard to resist such antics, but rewarding begging with a food morsel will only encourage pets to intensify their efforts.

Instead, try to preempt them by providing a rewarding alternative activity (such as giving a dog a toy to chew on their bed) while you eat your meal in peace.

Non-food related activities, including sensory gardens and digging pits, climbing opportunities or interactive toys may also provide suitable distractions.

Weight loss in pets is about giving them more years of good-quality life. With the right tools – not just calorie counting – we can keep our pets happy and healthy.