Social media is being used more than ever in today's society; everything can be found online, and we have made room for a trend in every corner of life. From makeup and fashion to organization and meals, there is a trend for everything. How are we supposed to keep our individuality in this time of commonality? Do I actually want to hit purchase, or am I trying to replicate what I saw online?

Let's start with the trends themselves; they don't always have to be perceived as negative. Many trends can help you figure out what you do and don't like. Types of clothing, makeup looks, aesthetics, foods, shows, etc., can help you figure out who you truly are. You can see a trend and realize "huh, that may not be for me" or "that's exactly what I've been looking for," but it changes from person to person.

However, more often than not, they don't promote individualism; instead, they promote the opposite. The French philosopher René Girard developed the Mimetic Desire, "the theory that human desire is not autonomous but imitated from others." We are not brought forth into this world knowing our likes and dislikes; it's something that is taught to us. Whether that's through the people we surround ourselves with, the films we watch, the trends we notice, and the home we grew up in, these factors influence the person that we become. The Mimetic Desire is directly correlated with trends; we have this innate desire to possess what belongs to others. We notice others have something we may want, but do we actually desire it, or are we simply trying to follow along? You see, a purse is trending, and now you're on the internet searching for the exact one, but why? You never wanted this purse before, so why is it something that you have to have now?

We don't need to conform to trends, but it's difficult to embark on a path that may be lonelier than another one. All of your friends enjoy a certain genre of music, and maybe you don't, but saying so makes you different, and being different might make you uncomfortable. However, isn't the fact that we all have differences what unites us? Isn't the beauty of society the diversity that sits among us all, from our upbringings to our hobbies? Don't be afraid to stand out a little bit; it might make someone else comfortable to stand out as well. It is important to separate yourself from a trend and wonder if it is truly what sits with you. Do I actually believe this, or am I forcing myself to do so because everyone seems to share that opinion? Separate your actual desires from what you feel forced to like. It's okay to appreciate trends without adopting them. Finding yourself is difficult in a time where everyone is chasing a version of each other, but instead, chase the person who sits at your heart.