The average American would spend almost their entire yearly income for peace of mind, according to new research.

A survey of 2,000 U.S. adults sought to uncover just how much Americans are willing to pay for peace of mind.

According to the results, those polled have an average household income of about $79,000 per year, yet they'd be willing to shovel out nearly three-quarters, or around $57,000, on a yearly basis for security and serenity.

Hypothetically, Americans would be willing to pay the highest cost to always be able to get necessities, such as groceries and medications, averaging about $21,000 per year.

Following closely behind is a $19,800 tab in order to never have to worry about losing their job and another $16,400 per year to never have to worry about an expensive medical bill or copay.

According to Dr. Jenny Martin, PsyD, founder of Gemstone Wellness, this high price tag might have more to do with an actual need for security than a desire to avoid the unexpected.

"We exist in an environment defined by economic uncertainty," said Dr. Martin. "Peace of mind has become psychologically equated with control, which feels harder and harder to find.

When core needs such as healthcare, employment, or transportation feel unpredictable, the nervous system remains in a state of threat. The idea of 'paying for peace of mind' reflects a deeper desire to secure safety and predictability — relief from chronic vigilance."

Despite the fact that almost half of those polled (47%) prefer to pay for peace of mind, 41% admit they currently aren't able to do so when they want.

Another recent survey by Talker Research and EarnIn revealed that the average American spends nearly half of their actual paycheck within the first two days of receiving it.

This leaves just 52% of a month's pay for the rest of the month, leaving almost no room for saving at all, let alone a five-figure peace of mind price tag.

According to the most recent poll, nearly one in five (17%) admit they're financially anxious every single day during an average month.

One in three (28%) feel peace of mind in general is less attainable today than it was five years ago.

But peace of mind doesn't need to be a premium or a luxury add-on.

"Sustainable peace of mind is less about removing uncertainty and more about increasing our ability to handle it," said Dr. Martin. "Research tells us that internal regulation, not external control, is the more reliable way to go.

Some strategies include:

Reducing the 'false urgency' effect by limiting overexposure to distressing media

Creating small, repeatable routines that signal safety to your body

Practicing micro-moments of control (structured time for exercise, intentional pauses in the day)

Building tolerance for discomfort. The Ice Cube Exercise is a great starting point. Try holding an ice cube in your hand until it fully melts. Notice the discomfort, but try to allow yourself to experience it and tolerate it, rather than judge it and react to it.

These habits are best when embedded into daily life in brief, consistent ways — shifting peace of mind from something purchased to something practiced."