Source: Nature
Title: Surge in fake citations uncovered by audit of 2.5 million biomedical science papers
URL: https://www.nature.com/articles/d41586-026-00748-w
Date: 2026-05-09T15:59:50.695782
Word Count: 1089
Category: 
============================================================

Surge in fake citations uncovered by audit of 2.5 million biomedical science papers Skip to main content Thank you for visiting nature.com. You are using a browser version with limited support for CSS. To obtain
            the best experience, we recommend you use a more up to date browser (or turn off compatibility mode in
            Internet Explorer). In the meantime, to ensure continued support, we are displaying the site without styles
            and JavaScript. Email Bluesky Facebook LinkedIn Reddit Whatsapp X The reference integrity audit of 2.5 million biomedical papers spans 3 years of scientific publishing. Credit: Aramyan/Getty An audit of 2.5 million academic papers has identified nearly 3,000 biomedical-science papers that contain fake references — ones that could not be traced to known publications. The findings, published in The Lancet on 7 May 1 , are contained in the first academic study to estimate the scale of fake citations in the biomedical literature. The authors designed an automated pipeline to screen papers from PubMed Central — a database of publicly accessible biomedical articles — published between January 2023 and February 2026. Their work suggests that the contamination of papers with fake citations is a rapidly growing problem in biomedicine. There were 12 times more publications with fabricated citations in 2025 compared with 2023 (see 'Fabricated references on the rise'). Source: Ref. 1 The findings are “conservative underestimates”, says study co-author Maxim Topaz, an AI researcher at Columbia University in New York. “What we identified is the lower bound of true prevalence. We’re scratching the tip of the iceberg,” he adds. Kathryn Weber-Boer, director of scientometrics at the London-based company Digital Science, agrees. The study is a “solid first initial contribution to the problem”, she says. (Digital Science is operated by Holtzbrinck Publishing Group, the majority shareholder of Springer Nature, which publishes Nature . Nature ’s news team is editorially independent of its publisher.) A Nature analysis published in April estimated that around 1.6% of publications from 2025 contained at least one reference corresponding to a publication which did not seem to exist. Reference mismatches In their study, Topaz and his colleagues developed a system to inspect the 125.6 million references cited by 2.5 million papers. They focused the analysis on 97 million references that had valid Digital Object Identifiers (DOIs) — unique strings of letters and numbers assigned by publishers and preprint repositories — or an ID assigned by the database PubMed. They used large language models (LLMs) to flag mismatches between the article title in each reference and the title of the paper that its DOI or PubMed ID led to. They also searched for the references across four scholarly databases: PubMed, Crossref, OpenAlex and Google Scholar. If the title of a reference did not appear in any of these databases, the team considered it to be fabricated. Hallucinated citations are polluting the scientific literature. What can be done? The analysis found 2,564 papers that contained one or two fabricated references, and 246 papers that contained three or more. “Whether they’re fabricated by a computer or fabricated by a human being, that’s a question that remains open,” says Weber-Boer. But she adds that “the growth in the problem suggests that there is a generative AI component ”. In a manual check of 500 flagged references, three independent reviewers confirmed that the citations were fabricated in seven out of ten cases. However, the analysis probably underestimates the total number of papers that include fake citations. “Google Scholar is not a reliable source” to verify references, notes Weber-Boer, because some fabricated references do appear on the site, but don’t trace back to genuine publications. Enjoying our latest content? Log in or create an account to continue Access the most recent journalism from Nature's award-winning team Explore the latest features & opinion covering groundbreaking research Access through your institution or Sign in or create an account Continue with Google Continue with ORCiD doi: https://doi.org/10.1038/d41586-026-00748-w References Topaz, M., et al., Lancet, 407 : 1779–1781. (2026) Google Scholar Download references Reprints and permissions Related Articles Hallucinated citations are polluting the scientific literature. What can be done? How to spot fake scientists and stop them from publishing papers The citation black market: schemes selling fake references alarm scientists Can researchers stop AI making up citations? Fake research papers flagged by analysing authorship trends Citations show gender bias — and the reasons are surprising Open-source AI tool beats giant LLMs in literature reviews — and gets citations right Self-citations in around a dozen countries are unusually high Subjects Publishing Latest on: Publishing My English skills are hurting my chances in academic publishing — how can I improve? Career Feature 07 MAY 26 Early-career researchers do more ‘disruptive’ science than veterans News 07 MAY 26 First AI tool to detect suspicious peer reviews rolled out by academic publisher News 06 MAY 26 Jobs Staff Scientist The Antibody Biology Unit (ABU) in the Laboratory of Immunogenetics, Division of Intramural Research, NIAID, seeks a staff scientist to join the team Rockville, Maryland National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, NIH Deputy Editor, Nature Communications Job Title: Deputy Editor, Nature Communications Locations: Shanghai, Beijing, Nanjing, Pune – hybrid working model Closing date: 29th May 2026     ... Shanghai, Beijing, Nanjing, Pune – hybrid working model Springer Nature Ltd Faculty positions in School of Basic Medical Sciences, Hainan Medical University PIs & Postdocs for cancer, immunology, neuroscience, stem cell, cardiovascular and related fields Haikou, Hainan (CN) School of Basic Medical Sciences, Hainan Medical University Global Recruitment of Outstanding Young Talents We are seeking exceptional candidates who qualify for the National Science Fund for Excellent Young Scholars (Overseas) 1068 Xueyuan Avenue, Shenzhen 518055 P. R. China Shenzhen Institutes of Advanced Technology (SIAT), Chinese Academy of Sciences（CAS) Seeking Global Talents at All Levels - SIAT We find Distinguished PIs, Senior PIs, Junior PIs, Senior Engineer, Junior Engineer, Post-doctoral fellow, Assistant research fellow. 1068 Xueyuan Avenue, Shenzhen 518055 P. R. China Shenzhen Institutes of Advanced Technology (SIAT), Chinese Academy of Sciences（CAS) Close banner Close Sign up for the Nature Briefing newsletter — what matters in science, free to your inbox daily. Email address Sign up I agree my information will be processed in accordance with the Nature and Springer Nature Limited Privacy Policy . Close banner Close Get the most important science stories of the day, free in your inbox. Sign up for Nature Briefing Search Search articles by subject, keyword or author Show results from All journals Search Advanced search Quick links Explore articles by subject Find a job Guide to authors Editorial policies