Source: Nature
Title: Three mental-health claims from RFK’s wellness movement: what scientists say
URL: https://www.nature.com/articles/d41586-026-01449-0
Date: 2026-05-09T15:59:55.871537
Word Count: 1355
Category: 
============================================================

Three mental-health claims from RFK’s wellness movement: what scientists say Skip to main content Thank you for visiting nature.com. You are using a browser version with limited support for CSS. To obtain
            the best experience, we recommend you use a more up to date browser (or turn off compatibility mode in
            Internet Explorer). In the meantime, to ensure continued support, we are displaying the site without styles
            and JavaScript. Email Bluesky Facebook LinkedIn Reddit Whatsapp X US health secretary Robert F. Kennedy Jr has been critical of antidepressant drugs. Credit: Alex Wroblewski/AFP via Getty Overdiagnosis, overmedication and withdrawal: that’s the bleak picture of US mental-health treatment painted at a Make America Healthy Again (MAHA) wellness summit attended by US health secretary Robert F. Kennedy Jr , the driving force behind the MAHA movement. The summit, which was held on 4 May in Washington DC, focused on what the group argues is the widespread overuse of drugs to treat mental-health conditions . Some speakers described agonizing withdrawal symptoms when they tried to wean off antidepressants. Others attacked what they characterized as an overdiagnosis of mental-health disorders in children . Psychedelics and immortality: Nature went to a health summit starring RFK and JD Vance “Our goal is straightforward: to reduce unnecessary dependence on medication, to improve patient outcomes and to return control to the patients,” Kennedy said at the summit, which was hosted by the MAHA Institute, a think tank in Washington DC that champions Kennedy’s work. “This is how we’re going to make America healthy again.” The MAHA movement focuses on chronic disease, which it links to factors such as poor diet and exposure to environmental toxins. Its adherents have also taken aim at the pharmaceutical industry, and some are wary of vaccines and conventional drugs. Even so, Kennedy and others at the summit noted that medication remains an important component of treatment for some people with mental-health disorders. Nature asked researchers to comment on MAHA advocates’ latest claims about mental-health treatment. Are US doctors overprescribing mental-health medication? On the day of the summit, the US Department of Health and Human Services (HHS), which Kennedy heads, released a letter to health-care providers urging them to consider alternatives to medication when treating mental-health conditions. One in six adults in the United States takes an antidepressant, Kennedy said at the summit, and one in ten children uses prescription medication for their mental health. “That’s not a marginal issue,” Kennedy said. “This is a system-level pattern.” Or, put simply: America has “a pill culture,” says Timothy Westlake, chief of staff at the US Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration in Rockville, Maryland. The ‘bible for psychiatry’ is getting a rewrite: your guide to the next DSM But Timothy Wilens, a clinical psychiatrist and president-elect of the American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, says that most practitioners are careful and consider other options before handing over a prescription. “They’re trying to make things better for kids,” he says, and medication can be part of treatment. The true problems, he says, are “underdiagnosis and undertreatment”. Wilens notes that as a result of uneven access to health care in the United States, at least half of US children with mental-health conditions are not diagnosed and therefore not treated with medication or anything else. “Having good medication, diagnostics and treatment available: that’s more the public-health crisis,” he says. Asked about Wilens’s comments, HHS press secretary Emily Hilliard said in a statement: “The overmedicalization of American children, characterized by escalating prescription rates, unwarranted interventions and declining health outcomes, signals a critical policy failure.” Is attention deficit hyperactivity disorder a ‘gateway diagnosis’? Some speakers at the summit expressed concerns about treatment for young children diagnosed with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD). An estimated seven million children in the United States have been diagnosed with the condition, which is sometimes treated with stimulants . There has long been a debate as to whether some diagnoses of ADHD have pathologized normal childhood behaviour. ADHD is on the rise, but why? After an initial ADHD diagnosis, many children go on to be treated for other conditions, such as depression and behavioural disorders — a situation that Gretchen Watson, a speaker at the summit and a clinical psychologist with an academic affiliation at the University of South Carolina in Columbia, sees as a sign of overreach. “It’s now evident, with the benefit of hindsight, that ADHD is a gateway diagnosis that opened the door to the medicalization of childhood and to drug cocktails for children,” she said at the event. Enjoying our latest content? Log in or create an account to continue Access the most recent journalism from Nature's award-winning team Explore the latest features & opinion covering groundbreaking research Access through your institution or Sign in or create an account Continue with Google Continue with ORCiD doi: https://doi.org/10.1038/d41586-026-01449-0 Additional reporting by Mariana Lenharo References Njardvik, U., Wergeland, G. J., Riise, E. N., Hannesdottir, D. K. Öst, L.-G. Clin. Psychol. Rev. 118 , 102571 (2025). Article PubMed Google Scholar Boland, H. et al. J. Psychiatr. Res. 123 , 21–30 (2020). Article PubMed Google Scholar Download references Reprints and permissions Related Articles RFK Jr slings accusations and defends public-health upheaval at fiery hearing How to make America healthy: the real problems — and best fixes The ‘bible for psychiatry’ is getting a rewrite: your guide to the next DSM ADHD diagnoses are growing. What’s going on? Huge genetic study reveals hidden links between psychiatric conditions Subjects Psychiatric disorders Depression Politics Government Latest on: Psychiatric disorders Depression Politics Are attention spans really shrinking? What the science says News Feature 06 MAY 26 US speeds up research into mind-altering drugs — including mysterious ‘ibogaine’ News 21 APR 26 Struggling to focus on research when the world is ‘on fire’? Some ways to cope News 01 APR 26 Struggling to focus on research when the world is ‘on fire’? Some ways to cope News 01 APR 26 My relationship with my PhD supervisor has become toxic — what do I do? Career Feature 03 MAR 26 Student mental health is in crisis — here’s how to help Comment 12 JAN 26 NIH grant cuts disproportionately hit minority and female scientists News 05 MAY 26 ‘Heartbreaking’: Iranian scientists on losing labs, libraries and liberty News 04 MAY 26 US lawmakers vote to reject Trump’s massive budget cuts — but call for substantial decreases News 30 APR 26 Jobs Staff Scientist The Antibody Biology Unit (ABU) in the Laboratory of Immunogenetics, Division of Intramural Research, NIAID, seeks a staff scientist to join the team Rockville, Maryland National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, NIH Deputy Editor, Nature Communications Job Title: Deputy Editor, Nature Communications Locations: Shanghai, Beijing, Nanjing, Pune – hybrid working model Closing date: 29th May 2026     ... Shanghai, Beijing, Nanjing, Pune – hybrid working model Springer Nature Ltd Faculty positions in School of Basic Medical Sciences, Hainan Medical University PIs & Postdocs for cancer, immunology, neuroscience, stem cell, cardiovascular and related fields Haikou, Hainan (CN) School of Basic Medical Sciences, Hainan Medical University Global Recruitment of Outstanding Young Talents We are seeking exceptional candidates who qualify for the National Science Fund for Excellent Young Scholars (Overseas) 1068 Xueyuan Avenue, Shenzhen 518055 P. R. China Shenzhen Institutes of Advanced Technology (SIAT), Chinese Academy of Sciences（CAS) Seeking Global Talents at All Levels - SIAT We find Distinguished PIs, Senior PIs, Junior PIs, Senior Engineer, Junior Engineer, Post-doctoral fellow, Assistant research fellow. 1068 Xueyuan Avenue, Shenzhen 518055 P. R. China Shenzhen Institutes of Advanced Technology (SIAT), Chinese Academy of Sciences（CAS) Close banner Close Sign up for the Nature Briefing newsletter — what matters in science, free to your inbox daily. Email address Sign up I agree my information will be processed in accordance with the Nature and Springer Nature Limited Privacy Policy . Close banner Close Get the most important science stories of the day, free in your inbox. Sign up for Nature Briefing Search Search articles by subject, keyword or author Show results from All journals Search Advanced search Quick links Explore articles by subject Find a job Guide to authors Editorial policies